CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Voicebox

Thank you for your interest in contributing to Voicebox! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing.

## Code of Conduct

- Be respectful and inclusive
- Welcome newcomers and help them learn
- Focus on constructive feedback
- Respect different viewpoints and experiences

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- **[Bun](https://bun.sh)** - Fast JavaScript runtime and package manager
  ```bash
  curl -fsSL https://bun.sh/install | bash
  ```

- **[Python 3.11+](https://python.org)** - For backend development
  ```bash
  python --version  # Should be 3.11 or higher
  ```

- **[Rust](https://rustup.rs)** - For Tauri desktop app (installed automatically by Tauri CLI)
  ```bash
  rustc --version  # Check if installed
  ```

- **Git** - Version control

### Development Setup

1. **Fork and clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/voicebox.git
   cd voicebox
   ```

2. **Install JavaScript dependencies**
   ```bash
   bun install
   ```
   This installs dependencies for:
   - `app/` - Shared React frontend
   - `tauri/` - Tauri desktop wrapper
   - `web/` - Web deployment wrapper

3. **Set up Python backend**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   
   # Create virtual environment
   python -m venv venv
   
   # Activate virtual environment
   source venv/bin/activate  # On macOS/Linux
   # or
   venv\Scripts\activate  # On Windows
   
   # Install Python dependencies
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   
   # Install Qwen3-TTS (required for voice synthesis)
   pip install git+https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3-TTS.git
   ```

4. **Initialize database**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   python -c "from database import init_db; init_db()"
   ```
   This creates the SQLite database at `data/voicebox.db`.

5. **Start development servers**
   
   **Terminal 1: Backend server**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   source venv/bin/activate  # Activate venv if not already active
   bun run dev:server
   # Or manually: uvicorn main:app --reload --port 8000
   ```
   Backend will be available at `http://localhost:8000`
   
   **Terminal 2: Desktop app**
   ```bash
   bun run dev
   ```
   This will:
   - Start Vite dev server on port 5173
   - Launch Tauri window pointing to localhost:5173
   - Enable hot reload

   **Optional: Web app**
   ```bash
   bun run dev:web
   ```
   Web app will be available at `http://localhost:5174`

### Model Downloads

Models are automatically downloaded from HuggingFace Hub on first use:
- **Whisper** (transcription): Auto-downloads on first transcription
- **Qwen3-TTS** (voice cloning): Auto-downloads on first generation (~2-4GB)

First-time usage will be slower due to model downloads, but subsequent runs will use cached models.

### Building

**Build Python server binary:**
```bash
./scripts/build-server.sh
```
Creates platform-specific binary in `tauri/src-tauri/binaries/`

**Build Tauri desktop app:**
```bash
cd tauri
bun run tauri build
```
Creates platform-specific installers (`.dmg`, `.msi`, `.AppImage`)

**Build web app:**
```bash
cd web
bun run build
```
Output in `web/dist/`

### Generate OpenAPI Client

After starting the backend server:
```bash
./scripts/generate-api.sh
```
This downloads the OpenAPI schema and generates the TypeScript client in `app/src/lib/api/`

## Development Workflow

### 1. Create a Branch

```bash
git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
# or
git checkout -b fix/your-bug-fix
```

### 2. Make Your Changes

- Write clean, readable code
- Follow existing code style
- Add comments for complex logic
- Update documentation as needed

### 3. Test Your Changes

- Test manually in the app
- Ensure backend API endpoints work
- Check for TypeScript/Python errors
- Verify UI components render correctly

### 4. Commit Your Changes

Write clear, descriptive commit messages:

```bash
git commit -m "Add feature: voice profile export"
git commit -m "Fix: audio playback stops after 30 seconds"
```

### 5. Push and Create Pull Request

```bash
git push origin feature/your-feature-name
```

Then create a pull request on GitHub with:
- Clear description of changes
- Screenshots (for UI changes)
- Reference to related issues

## Code Style

### TypeScript/React

- Use TypeScript strict mode
- Follow React best practices
- Use functional components with hooks
- Prefer named exports
- Format with Biome (runs automatically)

```typescript
// Good
export function ProfileCard({ profile }: { profile: Profile }) {
  return <div>{profile.name}</div>;
}

// Avoid
export const ProfileCard = (props) => { ... }
```

### Python

- Follow PEP 8 style guide
- Use type hints
- Use async/await for I/O operations
- Format with Black (if configured)

```python
# Good
async def create_profile(name: str, language: str) -> Profile:
    """Create a new voice profile."""
    ...

# Avoid
def create_profile(name, language):
    ...
```

### Rust

- Follow Rust conventions
- Use meaningful variable names
- Handle errors explicitly
- Format with `rustfmt`

## Project Structure

```
voicebox/
├── app/              # Shared React frontend
│   └── src/
│       ├── components/   # UI components
│       ├── lib/          # Utilities and API client
│       └── hooks/        # React hooks
├── backend/          # Python FastAPI server
│   ├── main.py       # API routes
│   ├── tts.py        # Voice synthesis
│   └── ...
├── tauri/            # Desktop app wrapper
│   └── src-tauri/    # Rust backend
└── scripts/          # Build scripts
```

## Areas for Contribution

### 🐛 Bug Fixes

- Check existing issues for bugs to fix
- Test your fix thoroughly
- Add tests if possible

### ✨ New Features

- Check the roadmap in README.md
- Discuss major features in an issue first
- Keep features focused and well-scoped

### 📚 Documentation

- Improve README clarity
- Add code comments
- Write API documentation
- Create tutorials or guides

### 🎨 UI/UX Improvements

- Improve accessibility
- Enhance visual design
- Optimize performance
- Add animations/transitions

### 🔧 Infrastructure

- Improve build process
- Add CI/CD improvements
- Optimize bundle size
- Add testing infrastructure

## API Development

When adding new API endpoints:

1. **Add route in `backend/main.py`**
2. **Create Pydantic models in `backend/models.py`**
3. **Implement business logic in appropriate module**
4. **Update OpenAPI schema** (automatic with FastAPI)
5. **Regenerate TypeScript client:**
   ```bash
   bun run generate:api
   ```
6. **Update `backend/README.md`** with endpoint documentation

## Testing

Currently, testing is primarily manual. When adding tests:

- **Backend**: Use pytest for Python tests
- **Frontend**: Use Vitest for React component tests
- **E2E**: Use Playwright for end-to-end tests (future)

## Pull Request Process

1. **Update documentation** if needed
2. **Ensure code follows style guidelines**
3. **Test your changes thoroughly**
4. **Update CHANGELOG.md** with your changes
5. **Request review** from maintainers

### PR Checklist

- [ ] Code follows style guidelines
- [ ] Documentation updated
- [ ] Changes tested
- [ ] No breaking changes (or documented)
- [ ] CHANGELOG.md updated

## Release Process

Releases are managed by maintainers:

1. **Bump version using bumpversion:**
   ```bash
   # Install bumpversion (if not already installed)
   pip install bumpversion
   
   # Bump patch version (0.1.0 -> 0.1.1)
   bumpversion patch
   
   # Or bump minor version (0.1.0 -> 0.2.0)
   bumpversion minor
   
   # Or bump major version (0.1.0 -> 1.0.0)
   bumpversion major
   ```
   
   This automatically:
   - Updates version numbers in all files (`tauri.conf.json`, `Cargo.toml`, all `package.json` files, `backend/main.py`)
   - Creates a git commit with the version bump
   - Creates a git tag (e.g., `v0.1.1`, `v0.2.0`)

2. **Update CHANGELOG.md** with release notes

3. **Push commits and tags:**
   ```bash
   git push
   git push --tags
   ```

4. **GitHub Actions builds and releases** automatically when tags are pushed

## Troubleshooting

See [docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md](docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common issues and solutions.

**Quick fixes:**

- **Backend won't start:** Check Python version (3.11+), ensure venv is activated, install dependencies
- **Tauri build fails:** Ensure Rust is installed, clean build with `cd tauri/src-tauri && cargo clean`
- **OpenAPI client generation fails:** Ensure backend is running, check `curl http://localhost:8000/openapi.json`

## Questions?

- Open an issue for bugs or feature requests
- Check existing issues and discussions
- Review the codebase to understand patterns
- See [docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md](docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common issues

## Additional Resources

- [README.md](README.md) - Project overview
- [backend/README.md](backend/README.md) - API documentation
- [docs/AUTOUPDATER_QUICKSTART.md](docs/AUTOUPDATER_QUICKSTART.md) - Auto-updater setup
- [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) - Security policy
- [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) - Version history

## License

By contributing, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the MIT License.

---

Thank you for contributing to Voicebox! 🎉

Commit message:

Fix dev mode to work without pre-built server binary
Previously, running `bun run dev` would fail because Tauri requires
the sidecar binary to exist at compile time, even in development mode.
This forced developers to build the full PyInstaller binary before
they could start development.

This change introduces a streamlined dev workflow:

1. Add `scripts/setup-dev-sidecar.js` - Creates minimal placeholder
   binaries that satisfy Tauri's compile-time check. Works cross-platform
   (Windows PE stub, Unix shell script).

2. Update Rust code to gracefully handle dev mode - When the sidecar
   fails to start, it checks if a manually-started server is already
   running on the expected port and connects to it instead.

3. Update npm scripts - `bun run dev` now auto-runs the setup script,
   and `dev:server` uses the correct port (17493).

4. Update CONTRIBUTING.md with clearer dev workflow documentation.

New development workflow:
  Terminal 1: bun run dev:server
  Terminal 2: bun run dev

The bundled binary is only required for production builds.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Voicebox

Thank you for your interest in contributing to Voicebox! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing.

## Code of Conduct

- Be respectful and inclusive
- Welcome newcomers and help them learn
- Focus on constructive feedback
- Respect different viewpoints and experiences

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- **[Bun](https://bun.sh)** - Fast JavaScript runtime and package manager
  ```bash
  curl -fsSL https://bun.sh/install | bash
  ```

- **[Python 3.11+](https://python.org)** - For backend development
  ```bash
  python --version  # Should be 3.11 or higher
  ```

- **[Rust](https://rustup.rs)** - For Tauri desktop app (installed automatically by Tauri CLI)
  ```bash
  rustc --version  # Check if installed
  ```

- **Git** - Version control

### Development Setup

1. **Fork and clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/voicebox.git
   cd voicebox
   ```

2. **Install JavaScript dependencies**
   ```bash
   bun install
   ```
   This installs dependencies for:
   - `app/` - Shared React frontend
   - `tauri/` - Tauri desktop wrapper
   - `web/` - Web deployment wrapper

3. **Set up Python backend**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   
   # Create virtual environment
   python -m venv venv
   
   # Activate virtual environment
   source venv/bin/activate  # On macOS/Linux
   # or
   venv\Scripts\activate  # On Windows
   
   # Install Python dependencies
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   
   # Install Qwen3-TTS (required for voice synthesis)
   pip install git+https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3-TTS.git
   ```

4. **Initialize database**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   python -c "from database import init_db; init_db()"
   ```
   This creates the SQLite database at `data/voicebox.db`.

5. **Start development servers**

   Development requires two terminals: one for the Python backend, one for the Tauri app.

   **Terminal 1: Backend server** (start this first)
   ```bash
   cd backend
   source venv/bin/activate  # Activate venv if not already active
   bun run dev:server
   # Or manually: uvicorn main:app --reload --port 17493
   ```
   Backend will be available at `http://localhost:17493`

   **Terminal 2: Desktop app**
   ```bash
   bun run dev
   ```
   This will:
   - Create a placeholder sidecar binary (for Tauri compilation)
   - Start Vite dev server on port 5173
   - Launch Tauri window pointing to localhost:5173
   - Connect to the Python server you started in Terminal 1
   - Enable hot reload

   > **Note:** In dev mode, the app connects to your manually-started Python server.
   > The bundled server binary is only used in production builds.

   **Optional: Web app**
   ```bash
   bun run dev:web
   ```
   Web app will be available at `http://localhost:5174`

### Model Downloads

Models are automatically downloaded from HuggingFace Hub on first use:
- **Whisper** (transcription): Auto-downloads on first transcription
- **Qwen3-TTS** (voice cloning): Auto-downloads on first generation (~2-4GB)

First-time usage will be slower due to model downloads, but subsequent runs will use cached models.

### Building

**Build Python server binary:**
```bash
./scripts/build-server.sh
```
Creates platform-specific binary in `tauri/src-tauri/binaries/`

**Build Tauri desktop app:**
```bash
cd tauri
bun run tauri build
```
Creates platform-specific installers (`.dmg`, `.msi`, `.AppImage`)

**Build web app:**
```bash
cd web
bun run build
```
Output in `web/dist/`

### Generate OpenAPI Client

After starting the backend server:
```bash
./scripts/generate-api.sh
```
This downloads the OpenAPI schema and generates the TypeScript client in `app/src/lib/api/`

## Development Workflow

### 1. Create a Branch

```bash
git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
# or
git checkout -b fix/your-bug-fix
```

### 2. Make Your Changes

- Write clean, readable code
- Follow existing code style
- Add comments for complex logic
- Update documentation as needed

### 3. Test Your Changes

- Test manually in the app
- Ensure backend API endpoints work
- Check for TypeScript/Python errors
- Verify UI components render correctly

### 4. Commit Your Changes

Write clear, descriptive commit messages:

```bash
git commit -m "Add feature: voice profile export"
git commit -m "Fix: audio playback stops after 30 seconds"
```

### 5. Push and Create Pull Request

```bash
git push origin feature/your-feature-name
```

Then create a pull request on GitHub with:
- Clear description of changes
- Screenshots (for UI changes)
- Reference to related issues

## Code Style

### TypeScript/React

- Use TypeScript strict mode
- Follow React best practices
- Use functional components with hooks
- Prefer named exports
- Format with Biome (runs automatically)

```typescript
// Good
export function ProfileCard({ profile }: { profile: Profile }) {
  return <div>{profile.name}</div>;
}

// Avoid
export const ProfileCard = (props) => { ... }
```

### Python

- Follow PEP 8 style guide
- Use type hints
- Use async/await for I/O operations
- Format with Black (if configured)

```python
# Good
async def create_profile(name: str, language: str) -> Profile:
    """Create a new voice profile."""
    ...

# Avoid
def create_profile(name, language):
    ...
```

### Rust

- Follow Rust conventions
- Use meaningful variable names
- Handle errors explicitly
- Format with `rustfmt`

## Project Structure

```
voicebox/
├── app/              # Shared React frontend
│   └── src/
│       ├── components/   # UI components
│       ├── lib/          # Utilities and API client
│       └── hooks/        # React hooks
├── backend/          # Python FastAPI server
│   ├── main.py       # API routes
│   ├── tts.py        # Voice synthesis
│   └── ...
├── tauri/            # Desktop app wrapper
│   └── src-tauri/    # Rust backend
└── scripts/          # Build scripts
```

## Areas for Contribution

### 🐛 Bug Fixes

- Check existing issues for bugs to fix
- Test your fix thoroughly
- Add tests if possible

### ✨ New Features

- Check the roadmap in README.md
- Discuss major features in an issue first
- Keep features focused and well-scoped

### 📚 Documentation

- Improve README clarity
- Add code comments
- Write API documentation
- Create tutorials or guides

### 🎨 UI/UX Improvements

- Improve accessibility
- Enhance visual design
- Optimize performance
- Add animations/transitions

### 🔧 Infrastructure

- Improve build process
- Add CI/CD improvements
- Optimize bundle size
- Add testing infrastructure

## API Development

When adding new API endpoints:

1. **Add route in `backend/main.py`**
2. **Create Pydantic models in `backend/models.py`**
3. **Implement business logic in appropriate module**
4. **Update OpenAPI schema** (automatic with FastAPI)
5. **Regenerate TypeScript client:**
   ```bash
   bun run generate:api
   ```
6. **Update `backend/README.md`** with endpoint documentation

## Testing

Currently, testing is primarily manual. When adding tests:

- **Backend**: Use pytest for Python tests
- **Frontend**: Use Vitest for React component tests
- **E2E**: Use Playwright for end-to-end tests (future)

## Pull Request Process

1. **Update documentation** if needed
2. **Ensure code follows style guidelines**
3. **Test your changes thoroughly**
4. **Update CHANGELOG.md** with your changes
5. **Request review** from maintainers

### PR Checklist

- [ ] Code follows style guidelines
- [ ] Documentation updated
- [ ] Changes tested
- [ ] No breaking changes (or documented)
- [ ] CHANGELOG.md updated

## Release Process

Releases are managed by maintainers:

1. **Bump version using bumpversion:**
   ```bash
   # Install bumpversion (if not already installed)
   pip install bumpversion
   
   # Bump patch version (0.1.0 -> 0.1.1)
   bumpversion patch
   
   # Or bump minor version (0.1.0 -> 0.2.0)
   bumpversion minor
   
   # Or bump major version (0.1.0 -> 1.0.0)
   bumpversion major
   ```
   
   This automatically:
   - Updates version numbers in all files (`tauri.conf.json`, `Cargo.toml`, all `package.json` files, `backend/main.py`)
   - Creates a git commit with the version bump
   - Creates a git tag (e.g., `v0.1.1`, `v0.2.0`)

2. **Update CHANGELOG.md** with release notes

3. **Push commits and tags:**
   ```bash
   git push
   git push --tags
   ```

4. **GitHub Actions builds and releases** automatically when tags are pushed

## Troubleshooting

See [docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md](docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common issues and solutions.

**Quick fixes:**

- **Backend won't start:** Check Python version (3.11+), ensure venv is activated, install dependencies
- **Tauri build fails:** Ensure Rust is installed, clean build with `cd tauri/src-tauri && cargo clean`
- **OpenAPI client generation fails:** Ensure backend is running, check `curl http://localhost:8000/openapi.json`

## Questions?

- Open an issue for bugs or feature requests
- Check existing issues and discussions
- Review the codebase to understand patterns
- See [docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md](docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common issues

## Additional Resources

- [README.md](README.md) - Project overview
- [backend/README.md](backend/README.md) - API documentation
- [docs/AUTOUPDATER_QUICKSTART.md](docs/AUTOUPDATER_QUICKSTART.md) - Auto-updater setup
- [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) - Security policy
- [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) - Version history

## License

By contributing, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the MIT License.

---

Thank you for contributing to Voicebox! 🎉
